Tears blind me while I race home. As I approach my yard, it dawns on me
that I might be able to outrun the person who was chasing us, but no
matter how fast I sprint, I can’t escape this new reality of curfews and
clandestine meetings and cinders rising in the air.
I push through the front door and slip inside, quickly shutting it
behind me. I’m panting, my heart racing, wiping the tears from my face
with my sleeve, terrified out of my mind that David might’ve been caught
by whoever was waving around that flashlight in the darkness. I’m
smacked with the smell of frying onions and adrak lehsan. The smell of
home juxtaposed with the sweaty, breathless odor of desperation and
the taste of rust in my mouth.
My parents rush out of the kitchen. My mom’s mouth falls open. The
blood drains from her face, and she rubs her eyes with her hands, clearly
wanting to erase this moment. She steadies herself against the whorled
bird’s-eye maple console table in our foyer, my parents’ first flea market
find as a couple, years before they had me.
My dad is every inch the professor. Thin but not muscular, with wavy
hair that always looks a bit messy, grays sprouting up here and there
among the dark chestnut brown, and black-plastic-framed glasses that he
prefers to contacts. He takes his glasses off and rubs the little reddish
indentations along the sides of his nose. He always does this when he’s
contemplating something deep or worrying.
“Layla,” he says, “explain yourself. Were you outside? Now? At night?”
His voice is firm, but he doesn’t yell. My dad is not a yeller. He barely
raises his voice at me, even when I deserve it. This is clearly one of those
moments.
My mom’s voice, however, is less restrained than my dad’s, as always.
She doesn’t wait for me to answer him. “You were supposed to be in your
room. It’s after curfew. What were you thinking? I can’t believe you
would do something this foolish. Do you know what could’ve happened?”
She shakes her head, clenching her jaw, fury and fear flashing in her
eyes. They’re lighter brown than mine, with specks of hazel and green,
what she claims is the assertion of her distant Pashtun blood.
My mom’s voice trails off because we all know what could’ve
happened. There are whispers of Muslims who have disappeared.
Muslims like us, who answered the census truthfully when asked about
our religion. Muslims who refused to hide.
I stare at my worn gray Converse All-Stars and try to scrape off the
dirt from one scuffed toe with the other.
“Layla. Answer your mother,” my dad says. Mother. He might not yell,
but he uses formal titles when he’s really mad.
I answer, my voice barely a whisper, “I was with David.”
“David? You broke curfew to see David? Are you crazy?” My mom
turns her back to me, pauses, then walks into the large main room of our
house, a living room that flows into a sunroom in the back. She falls into a
cream love seat tufted with multicolored cloth buttons and stares into
the fireplace. She’s like me; I know that her synapses must be on rapid
fire, but my mom’s practiced meditation for years. She says it’s the only
way she’s found to calm her mind. Wordlessly, she reaches up to the
nape of her neck and undoes the loose bun she wears when cooking. Her
dark hair, accented with the occasional gray strand, falls around her face,
shielding it from me. I see her fingering her rosewood tasbih bracelet. I
don’t need to see her mouth to know she’s uttering a prayer.
“Beta,” my dad says, using the Urdu word for “child.” If “mother” and
“father” are signals of his anger, “beta” is the clearest sign of his love. “I
know this is hard for you, but understand that David won’t face the
consequences you will. You can’t take these risks. Your mom and I, we’re
afraid for you.”
“I know. I’m afraid, too. But David is the only bit of normal I have left.
Please don’t make me give that up.”
My dad winces a little, like my words have struck him. He glances
down at the tan leather Indian khussa slippers he wears inside the house,
like he’s measuring them up, as if he’s wearing them for the first, and not
the millionth, time. Even though he’s not going to work anymore, he’s
still in his teaching uniform: navy V-neck sweater and jeans.
“Beta, you can’t leave again so close to curfew. It’s too dangerous. We
know it feels like prison. But it’s for your safety. It’s not up for
discussion.” Dad prides himself on being even-keeled, even when he’s
angry. Now, as he stares at me, it’s like looking into my own wide, dark
brown eyes.
I nod like I agree, which I don’t, but I need this conversation to end
because I’m desperate to text David to find out if he’s okay. I’m not sure
Dad believes me, but he accepts my nod as acquiescence. More
pretending. More lies we tell ourselves because reality is too much to
hold all at once. He gives me a mirthless smile and walks toward my
mom.
I make my way to the foot of the stairs and take a seat. I dig my phone
out of my pocket. I need to tell David that I’m home, I’m safe. He’s
probably out-of-his-mind worried, too, like I am about him.
One thing that isn’t pretend? Surveillance. I may do stupid things, I
may risk getting busted after curfew to see my boyfriend, but I’m not
dumb enough to send a regular text. We use the Signal app so our texts
are encrypted.
ME: I’m home. Are you okay?
DAVID: Yeah. It was Jim.
ME: From down the street? What the hell?
DAVID: He’s Patriot’s Alliance.
ME: WTF is that?
DAVID: I guess some new initiative to keep us “safe.”
ME: Right. “Safe” from people like me. Wait. They’re the ones using
PatriotAPP to snitch on their neighbors, right? Assholes.
DAVID: He didn’t see that it was you. I told him it was Ashley. That
we ran because the flashlight freaked us out, we thought he was a
serial killer or something. I think he believed me. He gave me this
bro pat on the back. It was gross.
ME: Will she back you up?
DAVID: She better. She’s my lab partner now, so I’ll sabotage every
damn experiment if she doesn’t.
A fireball grows inside my chest. Of course he was going to get a new
lab partner when I left school. Of course his life was going to continue.
I’m so filled with jealousy that Ashley—mild-mannered, sweet-since-
forever Ashley—gets to sit next to David for an entire hour at school
without having to risk anything. I want to throw my phone to the ground,
stomp on it, and crush it into tiny bits of glass and metal. But what’s the
use in complaining about how unfair life is? It’s always been unfair to
someone, somewhere. Now, I guess, it’s my turn.
DAVID: Layla?
ME: Here.
DAVID: I love you.
ME: I know.
DAVID: I’ll come by after school tomorrow if I
can. Okay? Sweet dreams.
ME:
What I want to text:
When I look up from my phone, I see that my parents have slipped
into the kitchen. I can hear them pulling dishes out of the cupboard and
setting the table. I run upstairs to put my phone away. No phones at the
dinner table in the Amin household.
I hurry back down and find my parents already seated in the dining
room. I take my usual chair, the gray tweed perfectly molded to the
shape of my body. No one says a word. My dad catches my eye for a
moment, but my mom doesn’t look up. She has the shorter fuse, and the
flames of her anger take longer to put out than my dad’s. They have their
differences, but they almost always present a united front. I learned that
when I was a kid and would try to play one off the other to get my way.
Never worked.
“Spinach?” my mom asks me. I can still hear a little edge in her voice,
but I can also tell she’s trying to soften it.
“No, thanks,” I say.
She offers some to my dad.
“As long as it’s not too garlicky,” he replies.
“After twenty years of marriage, I think I know how you like your
spinach.” My mom smiles at him and hands him a steaming bowl of palak
gosht.
I look at them, across the table from me. I grab the edges of my hoodie
and twist the fabric in my hands. Minutes ago I raced in the front door,
scared I was being chased by some government agent who turned out to
be the middle-aged dentist who lives down the street from David, and my
parents greeted me with looks of horror on their faces, and now they’re
married-flirting about spinach.
“I don’t understand how you guys are acting all normal,” I say. “A little
bit ago you were freaking out at me for being late for curfew, and now
we’re talking about garlic? They’re burning books—Dad’s books.”
“What do you expect us to do, Layla?” my father asks in a soft voice.
“How do you propose I stop a mob?” My dad has this calm-down-Layla
voice that he turns on when he wants to reassure me, make me feel safe.
But hearing it in my ears right now, it feels weak.
“I know you’ve both been too afraid to say anything, to do anything,
but your silence isn’t shielding us from hatred.”
My mom walks over to me and puts her arm around my shoulders.
Part of me feels like leaning into her embrace, but there’s a part of me
that’s angry, too, so I stiffen at her touch. She pulls away and takes a deep
breath. “Of course we want to say something, do something. But if we
speak out, we’ll be jailed. Then who will take care of you?”
For a moment, I feel ashamed for guilt-tripping them. But I push that
feeling away because the more I think, the more anger rushes through
my veins.
“We can’t ignore what the government is doing—what they’re making
everyone do. Dad got fired. We have curfews.” I shake my head. “You’re
too busy talking about spinach and garlic to say something. Do
something. Anything.”
“Beta,” my dad says, “we’re not ignoring the reality of our lives. We’re
not hiding. We didn’t deny who we are when we had the chance, did we?
If I recall, when I wavered, when I questioned if maybe we should lie, you
and your mother held steadfast. And you were right. We answered the
census truthfully. We are Muslims. We are Americans. And we will
continue to live our lives knowing that those two identities aren’t
mutually exclusive.”
“Well, maybe we should’ve lied on that stupid census. Maybe it’s
dumb to hold on to principles when your beliefs can get you in trouble,” I
tell them. “Other people lied. Sara and Aidan? They’re in London now,
avoiding this whole mess because they checked ‘no religion’ instead of
‘Muslim.’ Easy.”
My parents look at each other. My mom puts her hand on mine. “I
know we argued about it before, but your father and I believe this now
more than ever. We will not deny who we are. We won’t lie about being
Muslim. Muslims have been in America since the first slaves were
brought here. Can you even imagine what they went through to hold on
to Islam? What they endured?” Tears come to my mom’s eyes.
I turn to my dad. “Remember what you said before? About taqiyya?
What about living to worship another day? Maybe you were right.”
My dad sighs and shakes his head. “Beta, I spoke out of fear, out of an
instinct to protect you and your mom. And I do want to protect you, but
I’m ashamed that I allowed myself to think, even for a minute, that hiding
who we are would have been the right answer. Taqiyya, concealing our
religion, is forgivable, but only under extreme duress—only to save lives.
And the census was hardly a life-threatening situation. Look at Hazrat
Summayah. If she didn’t conceal her faith, it hardly seems acceptable for
us to do so.”
“She was tortured and impaled! That’s kind of a high bar for duress,
don’t you think?” I pause, waiting for my parents to disagree with me, but
they only exchange sad glances. I sigh and continue. “I understand what
you’re saying. We can’t erase ourselves. But look at what happened to
Nabra, and those Muslim students at Chapel Hill, and that seventy-year-
old New Yorker who was almost beaten to death after two guys asked if
he was Muslim. And those mosques that were burned down in Texas and
Seattle? Remember those ‘Punish a Muslim Day’ flyers that mysteriously
started showing up around Chicago and Detroit? Don’t you think we
should’ve protected ourselves then? Now look at us. I feel like we can’t
even breathe.”
I can see my words like knives, wounding my parents. My dad’s face
falls. My mom walks back to her chair, her hands clenched in fists at her
sides. “Layla. We made a choice. And it was the right one. What do you
think you’re going to accomplish by rehashing it now? The past is the
past.”
“Beta, we will do everything in our power to protect you,” my dad
says, gently taking my mom’s hand in his. She unclenches her fist to
accept his gesture. “But we can’t live a lie. It’s not only that every person
in this town and campus knows who we are—we host the interfaith iftar
every year, after all—”
“Hosted,” I say, cutting my dad off. “As in past tense. That all ended
after the election, didn’t it?”
He continues, not missing a beat. “We have a moral and ethical
obligation to tell the truth.”
So much of my dad’s poetry is about finding truth in small things. Of
course he believes this. And my mom—her whole chiropractic practice is
based on a holistic health approach to life. Sure, my dad calls her a
spitfire, and she is tough. But her love is fierce, too, and lies and
deception don’t enter her worldview. They both, in their own ways, so
desperately want to see the good in people and the world.
During the election, with paranoia and Islamophobia and isolationism
as the prevailing themes, my parents held on to this hope. During the
primary debates, when the now-president said on national television
that there was justification and precedent for a Muslim registry, my
parents, along with so many others, dismissed it as fearmongering, red
meat to rile up the base. They clung to their belief in the American ideals
of equality and freedom of religion even when they heard our leaders say
that men gathering around Confederate statues with hands raised in Nazi
salute were “very fine people.” When politicians seized on an attack at a
French nightclub to warn about creeping Sharia and sleeper cells on US
soil and polls began to favor the Muslim ban and the registry, so many of
us said, “It can’t happen here.”
The thing is, it’s not like half this country suddenly became
Islamophobes because of any single event. But the lies, the rhetoric
calling refugees rapists and criminals, the fake news, the false statistics,
all gave those well-meaning people who say they’re not bigots cover to
vote for a man who openly tweeted his hatred of us on a nearly daily
basis. Through the political dog whistles and hijabis having their
headscarves ripped off and mosques vandalized with swastikas and the
Muslims who went missing—through all of it, my parents prayed and
believed that things would get better. They seem to have this eternal
flame of hope.
But that’s not me.
I stand up and take my plate to the kitchen. I’m not hungry anymore. I
leave my parents to their hopes and prayers.
